Open finance: Our vision for 
a smart data future
April 2026
2
Open finance: Our vision for a smart data future
Contents
Chapter 1 Executive summary                                                                 Page 3
Chapter 2 Introduction                                                                           Page 5
Chapter 3 Vision                                                                                 Page 11
Chapter 4 Collaborating with industry to develop open finance                      Page 15
Chapter 5 Next steps                                                                           Page 18
Chapter 6 Open finance roadmap                                                           Page 19
Sign up for our news and publications alerts
See all our latest press releases, consultations an d speeches. 
3 
Open finance: Our vision for a smart data future
Chapter 1
Executive summary
1.1 Open finance has the potential to be the next major step in the UK’s smart data 
revolution. Building on significant progress in open banking, open finance can give 
consumers and small and medium-sized businesses (SMEs) greater control over their 
financial data, unlock faster and more personalised financial services, and strengthen 
competition, innovation and growth across t he economy. 
1.2 This roadmap sets out a clear and ambitious path to turn that potential into delivery, 
from now until 2030. It signals a shift from vision to action: prioritising real-world use 
cases, moving quickly to testing and design, and then scaling solutions that deliver 
tangible benefits for consumers, businesses and firms. Our approach is deliberately 
pragmatic, evidence-led and collaborative, drawing on lessons from open banking and 
international experience to ensure open finance develops in a way that is secure, trusted 
and proportionate. 
1.3 This year, we will lead the development of open finance, collaborating with stakeholders 
to prioritise what open finance sho uld deliver:
• We are prioritising high-impact use cases where open finance can deliver 
benefits most quickly, improving SMEs’ access to lending and consumers’ access 
to mortgages.
• Our PolicySprint in Q2 will build consensus on where open finance can materially 
improve consumer journeys and outcomes. We will identify what firms and fintechs 
need from a future framework to unlock access to key  data sets. 
• We will lead targeted engagement from Q2 to establish what industry-led progress 
can achieve – and where a future regulatory framework ma y be needed.
• Our FCA-led taskforce to develop a Prioritisation and Real-world Insights Selection 
Matrix (PRISM) will identify the impacts of use cases on consumer outcomes, 
competition, growth and innov ation by Q3.
• Our T echSprint in Q4 will show how open finance can be used as a tool to tackle 
challenges facing consumers, businesses and firms. It will also show the data and 
technology infrastructure required to unloc k use cases.
• We will seek views in Q4 on what we can do to ensure our regulations help to unlock 
benefits and promote the safe and responsible adoption of open finance, starting 
with a discussion paper on the fi rst scheme. 
1.4 From 2027 , we will move into design and coordination:
• As we identify more high-impact use cases, the data and infrastructure required to 
deliver them, and our role to unlock progress, we will think beyond a first scheme to 
seek views on a long-term regulatory framework for o pen finance.
• We will work with the T reasury on options for the regulatory framework for open 
finance. We will test where common frameworks, shared infrastructure and 
governance arrangements are needed to unlock benefi ts at scale.
4
Open finance: Our vision for a smart data future
1.5 Our longer -term activities, taking us up to 2030, will support confidence and scale:
• We will collaborate with industry on the launch of sustainable open finance schemes 
with clear governance, high standards of consumer protection and inter operability.
• We will keep our priorities under review as markets evolve, new technologies emerge 
and further high-impact use cases are identified. 
1.6 Open finance can unlock significant benefits if delivered effectively:
• Better outcomes for consumers and SMEs: leading to faster , simpler access to 
credit and financial products; more personalised services, better value and easier 
switching; earlier identification of consumers who may need support; and innovative 
ways of reducing fraud and fina ncial crime.
• Stronger competition and innovation: lower barriers to entry; greater incentives 
for firms to innovate and invest; and new products and services built on secure, 
consent-based da ta sharing. 
• Wider economic benefits:  more effective capital allocation, particularly for SMEs; 
productivity gains across financial services; and opportunities for UK firms to export 
open finance technology an d services. 
1.7 T o deliver our roadmap, we need stakeholders’ insights and expertise. These 
will be critical in identifying where regulatory intervention is needed to realise open 
finance’s full potential. We will also continue to collaborate with other regulators and the 
Government to ensure that the development of open finance is joined up with smart 
data schemes across sectors from  the outset.
5 
Open finance: Our vision for a smart data future
Chapter 2
Introduction
What is open finance?
2.1 Data underpins the modern financial sector, informing and shaping financial products 
and services. This includes credit, banking, insurance and investments. But much of this 
data is fragmented across many different firms, is not easy to access or share, and may 
be missing vital information. Even where consumers and businesses can access their 
data, they may have concerns about the safety of sharing it with firms, apps and other 
organisations. This means that tasks like applying for mortgages or switching between 
current accounts can be complex and require consumers and businesses to manually 
share their data mul tiple times.
2.2 Secure data sharing services can help people and businesses manage money more 
effectively, get better deals, and make payments directly from their bank accounts. 
Open banking already provides a secure, regulated way for consumers and businesses 
to share access to payments data with trusted apps. Open finance will take this further – 
extending secure data sharing across a much wider range of products an d services. 
Open finance’s transformative potential
2.3 Open finance will enable consumers and businesses to make their data work harder for 
them, unlocking better outcomes. It will give people greater insight into, and control 
over, their financial information. It can also improve financial inclusion by enabling 
personalised products and real-tim e insights. 
2.4 Open finance can fuel innovation and improve efficiency across financial services 
to reshape the UK’s financial system. This would create a more dynamic, inclusive 
and competitive sector. Some studies have suggested open finance could support 
economic growth, with McKinsey suggesting it could generate up to 1 - 1.5% of UK GDP 
by 2030. And research by Open Banking Limited and EY suggests that the economic 
impact of open banking and open finance combined could reach £7 .4 billion per 
year in 5 years.
2.5 Open finance will unlock more competitive pricing and simpler switching by allowing 
data to be shared more easily and reducing costs. It also builds on open banking’s secure 
authentication processes to offer stronger protections through better fraud prevention 
and reduced financial crime. The benefits of open finance could be intensified by 
drawing on emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI) and tokenisation to 
further transform financial services. Open finance and broader open data sources could 
also enable agentic payments to realise their full potential by allowing agents to use 
increased data to make informed, personalised decisions and execute transactions on 
behalf of users.
6
Open finance: Our vision for a smart data future
2.6 T o demonstrate the potential benefits of open finance, we have set out case studies 
showing how it could work across a range of financial products and services. As future 
use cases are yet to be agreed, these case studies are illustrative only, and full cost -
benefit analyses will need to be c arried out. 
Case study 1: How open finance could work for SME lending
Folu and Ade own a small, family-run coffee shop and want to open a second 
branch. They have been rejected for business loans in the past as they couldn’t 
provide evidence of adequate cash flow, but they want to try again. They sign up 
with a fintech firm that helps small businesses appl y for loans.
The fintech firm uses data sharing and insights powered by open finance to link 
to Folu and Ade’s business and pull together a real-time picture of the business’s 
transaction data and wider finances, including credit data. This provides a more 
accurate picture of the business’s cash flow than would be possible using open 
banking. The fintech firm analyses this data and recommends steps Folu and Ade 
can take to improve their cre dit profile.
Once Folu and Ade have decided that they want to apply for a loan with a retail 
bank, the fintech firm lets them make their loan application directly through its 
app. It uses the real-time business data that has been shared to pre-populate the 
loan application form for Folu and Ade to check, saving them time and hassle. 
Using the comprehensive and up-to-date business data shared by the fintech firm, 
the retail bank approves Folu and Ade’s loan application on t he same day.
Case study 2: How open finance could work for mortgages
Sara has recently purchased her first home, with the help of a mortgage with a 
building society. Sara also has a current account with a digital bank that she uses 
for her day-to-day spending, as well as a savi ngs account.
The digital bank offers an open finance-powered mortgage dashboard that Sara 
uses to help her understand when it would be most effective for her to overpay 
on her mortgage, and makes it simpler for her to make these payments. This pulls 
together a much wider range of information than is currently offered by open 
banking data and gives Sara greater control over h er finances.
T o do this, the digital bank draws on open finance data from across sectors. The 
dashboard combines data on Sara’s mortgage with the building society, data from 
her current and savings accounts, as well as market data on current interest rates. 
It uses these to forecast different scenarios to illustrate how overpayments could 
help Sara pay off her mortgage 2, 5 and 10 years sooner. It also compares this to 
Sara’s spending to help her better understand how overpayment could impact on 
her day-to-day budget.
7 
Open finance: Our vision for a smart data future
Sara chooses the option to pay off her mortgage 5 years sooner on the digital 
bank’s dashboard. This now overpays Sara’s mortgage for her on a monthly basis. 
Drawing on the additional datasets unlocked by open finance, the dashboard 
continually analyses her spending and wider financial data to make sure 
overpayments are affordable for Sara and within the parameters s he has set. 
When Sara’s overall spending increases, the digital bank sends her a notification 
suggesting she opts out of overpayments for a set period. There are also months 
where Sara chooses not to overpay. In both instances, she is able to simply click a 
button on the dashboard that switches off th is function.
Case study 3: How open finance could work for investments
Keiko has a current account with a retail bank, along with a savings account 
with another bank. T o help her make her money work harder, Keiko signs up 
with a fintech firm that offers an investment app authorised to give regulated 
finan cial advice.
Using data sharing enabled through open finance, Keiko is able to connect her 
current account and her savings account to the fintech firm’s app. She also 
connects data on her wider financial life, including her credit accounts and other 
debts. This provides a much more accurate picture of Keiko’s financial data than is 
currently possible under o pen banking.
The app looks at this information to identify trends in Keiko’s income and day-
to-day spending, and to conduct a suitability assessment. It uses this to suggest 
which of the fintech firm’s investment products would be most suitable for Keiko, 
and how much she could consider investing each month. 
Once Keiko has chosen a specific investment product, the app provides an easy-
to-use dashboard that shows her how her investments are  performing.
Case study 4: How open finance could work for debt management
Charlie is in a moderate amount of debt after struggling to pay back several short -
term loans he took out when he was younger. He has been gradually paying off his 
debt for 5 years and is trying to improve his low c redit score.
Charlie signs up with a digital bank that offers customers with problem debt 
detailed, real-time insights to help improve their financia l wellbeing.
With a couple of clicks, Charlie connects his current account, his credit card and 
loans, and his wider financial data with the digital bank’s app. Using enhanced data 
sharing powered by open finance, the app turns Charlie’s complex financial data 
into easy-to-understand insights, hints and tips. This helps Charlie understand 
8
Open finance: Our vision for a smart data future
where he could be saving money to help pay off his debts more quickly and 
improve his credit score. By drawing on wider data than is currently possible 
under open banking, the app is more able to tailor its insights and suggestions to 
Charlie’s lifestyle.
The digital bank also helps Charlie to act on these insights quickly and simply 
through the app. This includes helping him to identify and cancel subscriptions he’s 
no longer using. The app also scans for the best current accounts that can offer 
benefits for Charlie’s unique financial profile, and helps him to easily switch his 
account once he’s ready. With these open finance features, Charlie is able to pay 
off his remaining debt wi thin a year.
Unlocking open finance and progress so far
2.7 T o unlock open finance, we are exploring, with input and expertise from external 
stakeholders:
• How transformational could open  finance be?
• What opportunities is open finance best placed to realise, to deliver real value for 
consumers and t he economy? 
• What are the priorit y use cases?
• How can we communicate the benefits of open finance to consumers, businesses 
and the financial serv ices sector?
• How do we manage balancing risks while supporting  innovation?
• Which of the outcomes that open finance can achieve are most impo rtant to us?
• How can open finance enable us to be a smarter  regulator? 
• What infrastructure will best support open finance and how will we optimise this 
for success?
2.8 There are also key barriers that will need to be overcome. Previous FCA research 
has identified:
• Consumer concerns around sharing financial data due to privacy risks and inertia 
when it comes to switching to new products or services.
• Business uncertainty about investing in open finance tools due to concerns over 
costs, liability, compliance or fraud.
• Fragmented regulatory oversight that may result in inconsistent rules which delay 
the development and expansion of o pen finance.
• Lack of a clear incentive structure for firms to actively participate in open finance and 
imbalanced data access across th e ecosystem.
• T echnical and operational barriers including latency and cost.
• Systemic risks to network resilience. 
• Lack of centralised investment in shared infrastructure that would support 
interoperability, oversight and long-te rm adoption.
9 
Open finance: Our vision for a smart data future
2.9 We are exploring how these barriers can be mitigated, so open finance realises the 
benefits we want to see for consumers, businesse s and firms.
2.10 We have also worked with industry, drawing on insights from the open finance sprint 
we held in 2025, to identify priority use cases. We are prioritising exploring how open 
finance can improve access to lending for SMEs. They play a vital role in supporting the 
UK’s economic growth, and we recognise the importance of accessible SME finance.
2.11 Open finance could also harness new technologies to change the way advice and sales 
are delivered in the mortgage market. We will look to explore the opportunities for 
improving access to mortgages and seek to collaborate with the Government’s smart 
data scheme on reforming homebuying. 
2.12 We are already seeing organisations take the first steps towards proactively developing 
open finance products. Several firms are offering savings and investment management 
apps that pull consumer data together into one place with easy-to-use interfaces. We 
saw innovation progress in our most recent T echSprint, which ended in February 2026. 
The T echSprint allowed firms to test their open finance products and services with 
synthetic data to emulate real-world scenarios. Firms also explored proofs of concept 
to help SMEs manage cashflow and to package consumer and SME data into portable, 
reusable formats for mortgage and loan ap plications. 
Leading the smart data revolution
2.13 Open finance sits at the heart of the Government’s ambitions for smart data. Banking 
and financial services occupy a central place in the Smart Data Strategy  and the Modern 
Industrial Strategy , alongside other key sectors. This is further supported by the National 
Payments Vision , which sets out the Government’s goal for the UK to be a world leader 
in open finance. An important first step has been the introduction of the Data (Use 
and Access) Act in 2025. This gives the Government powers to introduce smart data 
schemes via sector -specific legislation.
2.14 We want open finance to facilitate the growth of the wider smart data ecosystem by 
linking into data from other sectors in the Government’s Smart Data Strategy . For 
example, we have already committed to collaborating with industry and the energy 
sector to explore how banking data can help assess whether people would benefit from 
social tariffs for utilities. Research published by the Department for Business and T rade 
suggests that smart data schemes across a number of core sectors – homebuying, 
international trade, retail and energy – could contribute £9.6 billion annually to UK GDP 
by 2043. Open finance will be a critical enabler for these schemes and would enhance 
their impact. 
2.15 We also want open finance to be an early example of the regulatory frameworks needed 
to unlock data in the economy. The Payments Forward Plan  sets out the Government’s 
intention for the open banking framework to lay the foundations for o pen finance.
10
Open finance: Our vision for a smart data future
Changing the way we regulate
2.16 We will design a safe regime that maximises benefits for consumers and firms and allows 
us to be a smarter regulator. Secure open finance data will make it easier and cheaper for 
the FCA and firms to monitor outcomes and identify issues earlier. This can support the 
shift to outcomes-based regulation driven by data, allowing us to pursue more holistic 
solutions acr oss markets.
2.17 As firms innovate and new products emerge, we will also need to make sure that 
rapid, cross-sector technological advances do not come at the expense of consumer 
protection. This will require an adaptable, flexible regulatory approach, with expectations 
that evolve as the market evolves. Over time, this may also reduce the regulatory burden 
on firms by reducing the need for highly prescri ptive rules.
11 
Open finance: Our vision for a smart data future
Chapter 3
Vision 
Our vision for open finance
We’re building a smart data economy that works for everyone — giving people and 
businesses control of their data, enabling safe, consent -based data sharing, and 
unlocking innovation and competition. Open finance will drive smarter products 
and services, business growth and UK leadership in financial  innovation.
3.1 In the sub-sections below, we set out what we expect open finance can deliver, the 
outcomes that will determine success, and what success looks like. While these are 
indicative and may also be influenced by other factors, they will support us in assessing 
our progress towards  the vision.
A. Increased innovation and competition
3.2 Broader access to customers’ information can lower barriers to entry by reducing 
data advantages. This could enable new firms to enter and scale in financial markets. 
It could also increase pricing pressure by reducing switching and search costs. These 
factors could fuel innovation towards new or improved products and services with 
greater choice, creating substantial benefits to businesses, consumers and the wider 
market. Open banking points to the possibilities. In the UK, open banking has 145 active 
third party providers  facilitating approximately 17 million active users . Overseas, open 
banking through Pix has revolutionised payments in Brazil, becoming the predominant 
payment method with over 155 million users. Open finance’s potential for innovation is 
further enhanced where it ties with other smart da ta schemes. 
3.3 With more accurate, complete and technologically accessible consumer data, firms 
can realise substantial efficiency savings and offer consumers and businesses 
tailored financial advice. Open finance’s benefits can be amplified by AI, to deliver 
features such as automated fraud detection, back-office operations and personalised 
customer service.
3.4 Different parts of the open finance ecosystem will experience these competitive 
pressures to differing degrees. We want to engage with industry, as set out in our 
roadmap (on page 19), to further understand lik ely impacts.
12
Open finance: Our vision for a smart data future
Outcomes Contributes to…
Open finance enables greater 
competition
• Reduced market concentration and greater firm entry
• Increased consumer switching rates, for example, in insurance
• Improved price, fees and value across financial services
Open finance enables more 
innovation
• The launch of new products and services, such as agentic 
commerce
• Increased investment in research and development
Open finance leads to 
enhanced efficiency for firms
• Higher productivity within financial services
• Reduced costs, frictions, and duplication
B. Inclusive consumer and SME outcomes
3.5 Through greater innovation and competition, open finance can offer significant 
opportunities to deliver better value and choice. Emerging use cases such as faster 
credit decisions using current account data, personalised investment offerings and real-
time financial man agement can:
• reduce the friction that consumers and bus inesses face
• more accurately meet sp ecific needs
• enable more effective financial decision-making at  lower costs
3.6 We will engage with consumers and consumer groups to explore how open finance can 
support the earlier identification of consumers with characteristics of vulnerability. For 
example, borrowers in financial difficulty, people experiencing gambling issues or who 
are digitally excluded. This will allow firms to proactively provide support, ensuring open 
finance benefits all  consumers. 
3.7 By drawing on emerging technology and wider consumer and business data, open 
finance can also support and enhance better consumer outcomes. Open finance 
products and services should meet consumer needs, offer fair value for money, support 
consumer understanding to ensure informed decision-making and enable support from 
firms to meet con sumer needs.
3.8 Open finance may also offer new and innovative ways of reducing fraud and financial crime.
Outcomes Contributes to…
Open finance is widely used by 
consumers and helps improve 
their financial lives
• High levels of adoption of open finance products
• High satisfaction of open finance users
• Improved financial outcomes of open finance users
Open finance improves financial 
inclusion for underserved or 
excluded groups
• Vulnerable consumers using open finance products to 
gain access to financial products, such as affordable 
credit
Open finance reduces the rate 
of fraud and financial crime
• Lower relative fraud rates and money laundering at firms 
using open finance technologies and products
13 
Open finance: Our vision for a smart data future
C. Enhanced economic growth
3.9 Open finance can support wider economic growth  by improving productivity, 
competition, and international competitiveness. Speci fically, by:
• Improving capital allocation  – more information could allow lenders to make better 
decisions and more efficiently provide capital to businesses, for example, in SME 
lending. This could raise investment across the broader economy and contribute to 
productivity growth, the key driver of growth in th e long term.
• Enabling consumers to make better financial decisions  – improved financial 
decision-making, lower prices/fees, and better switching could support consumers’ 
financial positions. Increased economic participation could also provide more capital 
for UK investment.
• Supporting risk allocation and mitigation  – data-enabled automation, analytics, 
and better risk assessment could improve financial inclusion, more accurately price 
risk and reduce fraud. This could support more effective risk taking by allowing risks 
to be managed appropriately and protecting economic agents from shocks.
• Increasing export opportunities  – exports of open finance technology and services 
will contribute directly to growth. Improved productivity in financial services could 
give an advantage to UK-based firms and attract increased foreign  investment.
Outcomes Contributes to…
Open finance generates  
growth in the UK
• Improved access to credit for consumers and SMEs
• Increased participation and financial engagement
• Higher exports of open finance technology
• Inwards investment to open finance firms
• Adoption of UK open finance standards internationally
Our ambition is for open finance to offer opportunities to streamline data 
sharing and improve efficiencies across a range of financial products and 
services, including:
• SME lending
• mortgages
• insurance
• pensions
• savings
• investments
• credit
• debt management
• account switching
Open finance: Our vision for a smart data future
14
The FCA ’ s vision for open fi  nance
We’re building a smart data economy that works for everyone – giving people and businesses control of 
their data, enabling safe, consent-based data sharing, and unlocking innovation and competition. 
Open fi  nance will drive smarter products and services, business growth and UK leadership in fi  nancial innovation.
A Increased innovation 
and competition
Realising our vision for open finance 
facilitates broader access to smart data. 
This increases competitive pressures 
on data holders and facilitates market 
entry for new firms, fuelling innovation.
More accurate, complete and technologically accessible consumer data, coupled with AI, facilitates:
Firms improving efficiency 
through enhanced back- 
office processes and lower 
costs to serve consumers, 
increasing productivity
New firms entering the 
market as barriers to entry 
related to customer data 
are reduced
Innovative new products 
and processes entering 
the market
Increased opportunities 
to switch between 
products, enhancing 
competitive pressures
B Inclusive consumer 
and SME outcomes
Through driving greater innovation 
and competition, open finance 
offers significant opportunities 
to deliver better value and choice 
for consumers and businesses. 
Enhanced competition and innovation offers significant opportunities to deliver better value and choice for consumers and businesses:
Faster decisions and 
improved efficiencies 
deliver lower prices and 
savings to consumers 
and businesses
Innovative new products 
offer personalised and 
specialised opportunities, 
enhancing inclusion and 
access to finance 
Data-enabled automation, 
analytics and decision-
making identify and limit 
fraud and financial crime
Whole-life view of 
consumers’ financial lives 
enables better informed, 
holistic decision-making, 
improving financial 
outcomes and 
limiting mistakes
C Enhanced economic 
growth
Improved productivity, competition 
and international competitiveness 
within financial services supports 
growth in the wider economy.
Better value for consumers and businesses drives growth in the real economy:
Improved capital allocation 
raises investment across 
the broader economy and 
contributes to productivity 
growth, the key long-term 
driver of economic growth 
Better financial decision-
making supports consumers’ 
financial positions, 
increasing participation to 
provide more capital for UK 
investment and allowing for 
greater consumption
Risk allocation and mitigation 
is supported, allowing more 
growth-enhancing decisions 
such as funding businesses 
and protection from 
economic shocks
Establishment as a world 
leader opens opportunities 
to export technology and 
attract inwards investment, 
contributing directly to 
growth and improving 
international competitiveness  
15 
Open finance: Our vision for a smart data future
Chapter 4
Collaborating with industry to develop 
open finance
4.1 Our research on the current state of open banking and the future of open finance  
highlighted the importance of a roadmap to provide clarity to industry and allow 
coordinated investment. So, we have set out a roadmap to 2030 (on page 19), outlining 
the key activities needed to develop op en finance. 
4.2 Our roadmap describes what we will deliver. It highlights the critical decisions that we, 
working with external stakeholders, will need to take to develop open finance at scale. 
Our roadmap also highlights where evidence and input from stakeholders will be vital 
for shaping the long-term regulatory framework. Roadmap activities will leverage the 
capabilities of our Innovation Hub  and our Smart Data Accelerator  to set up the next 
phase of delivery, gather evidence and help unlock the benefits of o pen finance.
4.3 Key activit ies include:
• T echSprints, research and testing, initially in Q1 and Q4 2026, allowing us to 
experiment, innovate and learn. Starting with our priority use cases, we will 
demonstrate how open finance can be used as a tool to tackle challenges faced by 
consumers, businesses and firms. We will support firms in developing innovative 
solutions to these problems and explore the data and technology infrastructure 
required to unlock new busin ess models. 
• Engaging with external stakeholders to progress the delivery of open finance. 
Activities such as a PolicySprint in Q2 2026 will help us build consensus on where 
open finance can improve consumer journeys and outcomes, as well as identifying 
what industry will need from a future framework to unlock access to key data sets. 
T argeted engagement from Q2 2026, including through workshops and roundtables, 
will help us better understand what industry-led progress could achieve, and where 
a future regulatory framework will be needed to remove barriers and enable further 
progress. Our engagement will also identify how to build confidence, for firms and 
fintechs to invest in open finance, and for consumers and businesses to adopt open 
finance products an d services. 
• Seeking views on what we can do to ensure our regulations help to unlock the 
benefits and promote the safe and responsible adoption of open finance. In Q4 
2026, we will publish a discussion paper focused on the first open finance scheme. 
We will then consider a long-term regulatory framework for open finance that 
enables data sharing to deliver high-impact use cases. Our testing will show where 
common frameworks, shared infrastructure and governance arrangements are 
needed to unlock benefits at scale. We will work with the T reasury to consider 
options for this regulatory framew ork in 2027.
16
Open finance: Our vision for a smart data future
4.4 In line with our commitment to be a smarter regulator, we are taking an agile approach 
to help open finance develop rapidly. Our vision sets out where we want to see open 
finance go in future, and we will collaborate with stakeholders to help realise this. We will 
develop a shortlist of future use cases and prioritise these according to impact. As we 
deliver use cases, we will seek feedback from stakeholders through retrospectives and 
other engagement, helping us to lea rn as we go.
4.5 T o enable open finance to develop quickly, we have started to explore what progress 
and innovation is possible today. We recently concluded T echSprints on SME lending and 
mortgages as part of our Smart Data Accelerator, which was launched in September 
2025 to advance open finance and smart data for consumers and businesses in the UK. 
The T echSprints ran from November 2025 to February 2026, allowing participants to 
use synthetic data to test how their open finance products and services could operate. 
Participating firms pushed boundaries to address sector challenges with innovative 
solutions such as AI-enhanced affordability assessment tools for mortgages, reusable 
data packages for loan applications and AI-assisted business planning for SMEs, showing 
strong commitment to making open financ e a reality.
4.6 In parallel, we are working with stakeholders to identify and unlock further high-impact 
use cases. We have launched an FCA-led taskforce to develop a Prioritisation and Real-
world Insights Selection Matrix (PRISM) by Q3 2026, identifying the impacts of use cases 
on consumer outcomes, competition, growth and innovation. This brings together the 
expertise of industry, consumer groups, academia and technical experts to help shape 
an open finance ecosystem that delivers measurabl e benefits. 
4.7 We are also drawing on lessons learned from the roll out of open banking. We previously 
worked with industry to enable the expansion of open banking services, which now have 
approximately 17 million active users , representing nearly 1 in 3 adults in the UK. We 
have also supported industry to make progress towards the roll out of a commercial 
variable recurring payment scheme on an industry-led, voluntary basis. And to set up 
a scheme operator, the UK Payments Initiative , which brings together 31 firms from 
across the ecosystem. We are now exploring how the development of open finance can 
benefit from similar approaches and where it may need to  go further.
4.8 We are exploring how to strengthen authentication, consent, and trust across open 
finance, and how this can be underpinned by a robust, interoperable infrastructure. 
This includes our recently announced technology and infrastructure research to 
explore infrastructure and architecture models, assessing aspects such as emerging 
technologies, impact and governance. We will test the findings with industry and other 
stakeholders and use this to guide our decision-making on the long-term evolution of 
open financ e in the UK.
4.9 Alongside regulatory design, we want industry to come together to explore which 
aspects of open finance can be delivered without additional regulation. We will work 
with industry to carry out further testing and experimentation, supported by synthetic 
data and our Digital Sandbox  – this will help to highlight potential barriers and misaligned 
incentives between different participants. It will also help us understand where 
regulatory intervention may be needed to achieve further benefits and to enable open 
finance to reach its ful l potential.
17 
Open finance: Our vision for a smart data future
4.10 We are collaborating with the Digital Regulation Cooperation Forum  on the Consumer 
Duty and its interactions with data protection, supporting the development of open 
finance data sharing. We also continue to support industry-led initiatives to use smart 
data to address challenges faced by consumers and businesses. For example, the 
Centre for Finance, Innovation and T echnology’s previous open finance coalition and 
current SME Access to Credit  coalition . 
4.11 We will continue to collaborate with other jurisdictions and international stakeholders to 
explore cross-border data portability and open finance. We are part of Project Aperta , 
a Bank for International Settlements Innovation Hub Hong Kong project aimed at 
reducing frictions and costs in global finance. Initial use cases include SME bank account 
opening and cross-border trade finance. Streamlining these processes in a secure and 
technology-forward way has potentially transformative opportunities for businesses 
and cross-border finance. We look forward to testing these use cases with our Project 
Aperta partners and pushing the boundaries of what is possible in cross-border 
data sharing.
18
Open finance: Our vision for a smart data future
Chapter 5
Next steps
5.1 Over the coming months, we will assess the impact of this paper on the wider 
ecosystem. We will also keep our planned activities, as set out in our roadmap, 
under review. 
5.2 Please email OpenFinanceRoadmap@fca.org.uk  if you wish to discuss  this paper.
Open finance: Our vision for a smart data future
19
Chapter 6
Open finance roadmap
2026: Collaboration to prioritise what open fi  nance should deliver 2027: Design and coordination 2028 – 2030: Scaling upQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4 H1 H2
We will gather 
evidence 
through 
experimentation 
via T echSprints 
with external 
stakeholders
Further 
T echSprints with 
industry and 
consumer groups
We will work 
with external 
stakeholders to 
test proposed 
scheme 
frameworks 
and underlying 
policies through 
PolicySprints
We will convene 
external 
stakeholders 
to identify the 
impact of future 
use cases
We will engage 
with external 
stakeholders 
to explore 
what an open 
fi  nance scheme 
and underlying 
framework 
could look like
Engagement with industry, 
consumer groups and regulators 
to scope a framework for 
the first scheme
Discussion paper on 
delivering a long-term 
regulatory framework 
Working 
with the 
T reasury on 
options for 
a regulatory 
framework 
Engagement with 
industry, consumer 
groups and regulators 
to scope a long-term 
regulatory framework
PRISM taskforce 
with industry, 
consumer groups, 
academia and 
technical experts
PRISM 
taskforce 
report
Mortgages PolicySprint 
with industry, 
consumer groups 
and regulators
PolicySprint 
outcomes 
report
SME Lending 
and Mortgages 
T echSprints with 
industry and 
consumer groups
T echSprints 
outcomes 
report
Further 
T echSprints with 
industry and 
consumer groups 
T echSprints 
outcomes 
report
Research on architecture and 
technology infrastructure
T esting of architecture 
and technology 
infrastructure models
Future open finance 
schemes will be developed 
and launched in line with 
the cycle below:
Identify and agree 
next use case
Develop scheme 
framework
T est framework 
and policies
Consult and 
refine
Launch 
scheme
Further 
PolicySprints 
with industry, 
consumer groups 
and regulators for 
next use case
Discussion paper 
on delivering a 
framework for the 
first scheme
© Financial Conduct Au thority 2026
12 Endeavour Square Lo ndon E20 1JN  
T elephone: +44 (0)20 7066 1000
Website: ww w.fca.org.uk
All rig hts reserved
Pub ref: D4653
All our publications are available to download from www.fca.org.uk .
Request an alternative format 
Please complete this form if you require this content in an alterna tive format .
Or call 0207 066 1000
Sign up for our news and publications alerts